RFC: Better fee handling (#53)
polkadot-fellows/xcm-format: proposals/0053-better-fee-handling.md

---
Title: Fee handling generalization and simplification
Number: 53
Status: Draft
Version: 5
Authors:
 - Francisco Aguirre
Created: 2024-03-01
Impact: Low
Requires:
Replaces:
---

## Summary

XCM already handles execution fees in an effective and efficient manner using the `BuyExecution` instruction.
However, other types of fees are not handled as effectively -- for example, delivery fees.
Fees exist that can't be measured using `Weight` -- as execution fees can -- so a new method should be thought up for those cases.
This RFC proposes making the fee handling system simpler and more general, by doing two things:
- Adding a `fees` register

> - Replacing `BuyExecution` with a new instruction `PayFees` with new semantics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deprecating `BuyExecution` and adding a new instruction `PayFees` with new semantics to ultimately replace it.
```

This moves the specifics of fees further away from the XCM standard, and more into the actual underlying XCVM implementation, which is a good thing.

## Motivation

Execution fees are handled correctly by XCM right now.
However, the addition of extra fees, like for message delivery, result in awkward ways of integrating them into the XCVM implementation.
The standard should have a way to correctly deal with these implementation specific fees, that might not exist in every system that uses XCM.

## Specification

The new instruction that will replace `BuyExecution` is a much simpler and general version: `PayFees`.
This instruction takes some `Assets` and takes them from the holding register, putting them into a new `fees` register.
The XCVM implementation can now use these `Assets` to make sure every necessary fee is paid for, this includes execution fees, delivery fees, or any other fee.

```rust
PayFees { assets: Assets }
```

This new instruction will reserve **the entirety** of `assets` for fee payment.
The assets can't be used for anything else during the entirety of the program.
This is different from the current semantics of `BuyExecution`.

> If not all `Assets` in the `fees` register are used when the execution ends, then we trap them.

Reviewer 2: I also don't like trapping asset. With the current model, we almost always needs a `RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset` at end of the XCM to avoid trapped asset. Can we do it better?

I see a few options:
- Make `PayFees` also takes another optional refund address and automatically refund unused fees to it at end of the execution
- Have a version of `DepositAsset` that deposit assets from all the asset register including fees and holdings
- Do nothing. Just inform devs that it is suggested to always have `RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset` at end of the XCM to avoid trapped asset.
- A `SetTrapAssetDestination` instruction that automatically deposit trapped asset into an account, instead of actually trap it

Author: I agree it's not the best to always require `RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset`.

I like the idea of depositing to some account instead of trapping the assets. At least letting the user specify that behaviour.

For example, [`SetAssetClaimer`](https://github.com/paritytech/xcm-format/blob/master/proposals/0037-custom-asset-claimer.md) is already approved, which lets the user specify who can claim trapped assets.
We could have something similar that allows the user to specify they want to deposit leftover assets to a particular location instead of trapping them.
However, this would just reduce the two instructions (`RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset`) to one (something like `SetLeftoverFeesDestination`).
Not sure how much more useful that is.

We could make the default behaviour be to deposit the leftover fees to the Location specified by origin, given that we expect them to always be a little bit more than needed. If the user wants to specify the location for said leftover fees (say, an account they own in the local system that's not the sovereign account), they can specify it.

I think this would change the least assumptions about XCM programs. What do you think?

Reviewer: I haven't properly thought it through, so I won't offer an opinion on what is best option, but I want to call out early that we should (always) design this to be usable in multi-hops XCM programs.

E.g. going through remote reserve where the user might not have an account, or going over a bridge where delivery fees need to be paid at both intermediary bridge-hubs, etc.

Reviewer 2: One benefit of `SetXXX` is that we call it at the beginning of the execution and it will be executed no matter what. On the other hand, the `RefundSurplus` at end may not be skipped because errors. We do have instructions to handle errors but then it maybe a bit more complicated? Actually we don't really have a best practice about how to write error-proof XCM and someone need to spend a bit of time to think about all the situations and come up some good recommendations. e.g. always have `SetAppendix` to execute `RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset` to ensure no trapped asset no matter what.

Author: Yeah the `SetX` instruction would need a new register holding a Location to where you want to deposit leftover fees. I think it's a good idea.

Reviewer 3: I was never a fan of asset traps because it is not trivial to recover traps, etc. - I like having a field in `PayFees` where assets left in the holding register are sent to if program execution fails.

Even by default, I think the address should be the sovereign account of the origin chain. Therefore, it is up to the governance system of such a chain to help recover the assets.

@xlc - you can always put the `RefundSurplus` + `DepositAsset` within a `SetAppendix` so that it is "ensured" that they get executed if program execution fails. That is what we do with the XCM-Transactor we use at Moonbeam to do remote transacts (although we make it optional because before the cost of adding those extra instructions was "high")

Reviewer: > I was never a fan of asset traps because it is not trivial to recover traps, etc. - I like having a field in PayFees where assets left in the holding register are sent to if program execution fails.

With the upcoming [SetAssetClaimer](https://github.com/paritytech/xcm-format/blob/master/proposals/0037-custom-asset-claimer.md), you could achieve exactly that without having to "bake it in" the `PayFees` instruction.

Redesigning the asset trapping mechanism is also something on the TODO list, with ideas like depositing directly to sovereign accounts (custom account if set by `SetAssetClaimer` or the sovereign account of the origin chain by default). But that should be discussed in a dedicated RFC imo.

### Examples

Most XCM programs that pay for execution are written like so:

```rust
// Instruction that loads the holding register
BuyExecution { assets, weight_limit }
// ...rest
```

With this RFC, the structure would be the same, but using the new instruction, that has different semantics:

```rust
// Instruction that loads the holding register
PayFees { assets }
// ...rest
```

## Security considerations

Overpaying for fees might have an increase in trapped assets.

> Depending on the method used for trapping assets, this might result in too much storage used.

Reviewer: When coupling this with a good fee discovery mechanism (being discussed in https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/690), this concern is diminished. At least from users acting in good faith. We still need to consider if/how this can be exploited in bad faith.

Reviewer 2: yeah current trap asset implementation is flawed https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/901

Author: It would make sense to not trap fees, or (fees + assets) if the amount is below a particular threshold. That way we prevent extra storage bloat.

Reviewer 4: Instead of trapping the asset, can you automatically `RefundSurplus` and `DepositAsset` back to the account being executed from, to reduce the likelihood that someone would forget to execute those operations and slowly lose assets over time?

Reviewer 5: > Instead of trapping the asset, can you automatically `RefundSurplus` and `DepositAsset` back to the account being executed from, to reduce the likelihood that someone would forget to execute those operations and slowly lose assets over time?

I thought about this once, but this assumes an explicit implementation more related to XCVM rather than XCM (for example, consider cases where more than one asset is being withdrawn, how is this automatically handled by the transaction format without enforcing an XCVM specific behaviour?).

I think that part of the design is okay as it is now.

That said, yeah, the assets trap design can be improved.
